SOURCE: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Medicare Coverage Database
DOCUMENT: National Coverage Determination (NCD) 240.4.1
TITLE: Sleep Testing for Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
URL: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?NCDId=330&NCDver=1
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS VERSION: 03/03/2009
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-26
NOTE: Verbatim policy text. Site navigation, transmittal numbers and revision
history have been omitted; no policy language has been altered.

A. General

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is the collapse of the oropharyngeal walls and the obstruction of
airflow occurring during sleep. Diagnostic tests for OSA have historically been classified into
four types. The most comprehensive is designated Type I attended facility based polysomnography
(PSG), which is considered the reference standard for diagnosing OSA. Attended facility based
polysomnogram is a comprehensive diagnostic sleep test including at least electroencephalography
(EEG), electro-oculography (EOG), electromyography (EMG), heart rate or electrocardiography (ECG),
airflow, breathing/respiratory effort, and arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) furnished in a sleep
laboratory facility in which a technologist supervises the recording during sleep time and has the
ability to intervene if needed.

Three categories of portable monitors (used both in attended and unattended settings) have been
developed for the diagnosis of OSA. Type II monitors have a minimum of 7 channels (e.g., EEG, EOG,
EMG, ECG-heart rate, airflow, breathing/respiratory effort, SaO2) - this type of device monitors
sleep staging, so AHI can be calculated. Type III monitors have a minimum of 4 monitored channels
including ventilation or airflow (at least two channels of respiratory movement or respiratory
movement and airflow), heart rate or ECG, and oxygen saturation. Type IV devices may measure one,
two, three or more parameters but do not meet all the criteria of a higher category device.

Indications and Limitations of Coverage

B. Nationally Covered Indications

Effective for claims with dates of service on and after March 3, 2009, the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services finds that the evidence is sufficient to determine that the results of the sleep
tests identified below can be used by a beneficiary's treating physician to diagnose OSA.

1. Type I PSG is covered when used to aid the diagnosis of OSA in beneficiaries who have clinical
signs and symptoms indicative of OSA if performed attended in a sleep lab facility.

2. Type II or Type III sleep testing devices are covered when used to aid the diagnosis of OSA in
beneficiaries who have clinical signs and symptoms indicative of OSA if performed unattended in or
out of a sleep lab facility or attended in a sleep lab facility.

3. Type IV sleep testing devices measuring three or more channels, one of which is airflow, are
covered when used to aid the diagnosis of OSA in beneficiaries who have signs and symptoms
indicative of OSA if performed unattended in or out of a sleep lab facility or attended in a sleep
lab facility.

4. Sleep testing devices measuring three or more channels that include actigraphy, oximetry, and
peripheral arterial tone, are covered when used to aid the diagnosis of OSA in beneficiaries who
have signs and symptoms indicative of OSA if performed unattended in or out of a sleep lab facility
or attended in a sleep lab facility.

C. Nationally Non-Covered Indications

Effective for claims with dates of services on and after March 3, 2009, other diagnostic sleep
tests for the diagnosis of OSA, other than those noted above for prescribing CPAP, are not
sufficient for the coverage of CPAP and are not covered.

D. Other

N/A
