SOURCE: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Medicare Coverage Database
DOCUMENT: National Coverage Determination (NCD) 100.1
TITLE: Bariatric Surgery for Treatment of Co-Morbid Conditions Related to Morbid Obesity
URL: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?NCDId=57
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS VERSION: 09/24/2013
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-26
NOTE: Verbatim policy text. Site navigation, transmittal numbers and revision
history have been omitted; no policy language has been altered.

A. General

Obesity may be caused by medical conditions such as hypothyroidism, Cushing's disease, and
hypothalamic lesions, or can aggravate a number of cardiac and respiratory diseases as well as
diabetes and hypertension. Non-surgical services in connection with the treatment of obesity are
covered when such services are an integral and necessary part of a course of treatment for one of
these medical conditions.

Bariatric surgery procedures are performed to treat comorbid conditions associated with morbid
obesity. Two types of surgical procedures are employed. Malabsorptive procedures divert food from
the stomach to a lower part of the digestive tract where the normal mixing of digestive fluids and
absorption of nutrients cannot occur. Restrictive procedures restrict the size of the stomach and
decrease intake. Surgery can combine both types of procedures.

Descriptions of bariatric surgery procedures:

1. Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGBP). The RYGBP achieves weight loss by gastric restriction and
malabsorption. Reduction of the stomach to a small gastric pouch (30 cc) results in feelings of
satiety following even small meals. RYGBP procedures can be open or laparoscopic.

2. Biliopancreatic Diversion with Duodenal Switch (BPD/DS) or Gastric Reduction Duodenal Switch
(BPD/GRDS). The BPD achieves weight loss by gastric restriction and malabsorption. BPD/DS or
BPD/GRDS procedures can be open or laparoscopic.

3. Adjustable Gastric Banding (AGB). The AGB achieves weight loss by gastric restriction only. A
band creating a gastric pouch with a capacity of approximately 15 to 30 cc's encircles the
uppermost portion of the stomach. AGB procedures are laparoscopic only.

4. Sleeve Gastrectomy. Sleeve gastrectomy is a 70%-80% greater curvature gastrectomy (sleeve
resection of the stomach) with continuity of the gastric lesser curve being maintained while
simultaneously reducing stomach volume. Sleeve gastrectomy procedures can be open or laparoscopic.

5. Vertical Gastric Banding (VGB). The VGB achieves weight loss by gastric restriction only. VGB
procedures are essentially no longer performed.

Indications and Limitations of Coverage

B. Nationally Covered Indications

Effective for services performed on and after February 21, 2006, Open and laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass (RYGBP), open and laparoscopic Biliopancreatic Diversion with Duodenal Switch
(BPD/DS) or Gastric Reduction Duodenal Switch (BPD/GRDS), and laparoscopic adjustable gastric
banding (LAGB) are covered for Medicare beneficiaries who have a body-mass index >= 35, have at
least one co-morbidity related to obesity, and have been previously unsuccessful with medical
treatment for obesity.

Effective for dates of service on and after February 21, 2006, these procedures are only covered
when performed at facilities that are: (1) certified by the American College of Surgeons as a Level
1 Bariatric Surgery Center; or (2) certified by the American Society for Bariatric Surgery as a
Bariatric Surgery Center of Excellence. Effective for dates of service on and after September 24,
2013, facilities are no longer required to be certified.

Effective for services performed on and after February 12, 2009, the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) determines that Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a co-morbidity for purposes of
this NCD.

C. Nationally Non-Covered Indications

Treatments for obesity alone remain non-covered.

Supplemented fasting is not covered under the Medicare program as a general treatment for obesity.

The following bariatric surgery procedures are non-covered for all Medicare beneficiaries:
Open adjustable gastric banding;
Open sleeve gastrectomy;
Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (prior to June 27, 2012);
Open and laparoscopic vertical banded gastroplasty;
Intestinal bypass surgery; and,
Gastric balloon for treatment of obesity.

D. Other

Effective for services performed on and after June 27, 2012, Medicare Administrative Contractors
(MACs) acting within their respective jurisdictions may determine coverage of stand-alone
laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) for the treatment of co-morbid conditions related to obesity
in Medicare beneficiaries only when all of the following conditions a.-c. are satisfied.

a. The beneficiary has a body-mass index (BMI) >= 35 kg/m2,
b. The beneficiary has at least one co-morbidity related to obesity, and,
c. The beneficiary has been previously unsuccessful with medical treatment for obesity.

The determination of coverage for any bariatric surgery procedures that are not specifically
identified in an NCD as covered or non-covered, for Medicare beneficiaries who have a body-mass
index >= 35, have at least one co-morbidity related to obesity, and have been previously
unsuccessful with medical treatment for obesity, is left to the local MACs.
