SOURCE: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Medicare Coverage Database
DOCUMENT: National Coverage Determination (NCD) 240.4
TITLE: Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) Therapy For Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
URL: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?ncdid=226
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS VERSION: 03/13/2008
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-26
NOTE: Verbatim policy text. Site navigation, transmittal numbers and revision
history have been omitted; no policy language has been altered.

A. General

Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) is a non-invasive technique for providing single levels
of air pressure from a flow generator, via a nose mask, through the nares. The purpose is to
prevent the collapse of the oropharyngeal walls and the obstruction of airflow during sleep, which
occurs in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

The apnea hypopnea index (AHI) is equal to the average number of episodes of apnea and hypopnea per
hour. The respiratory disturbance index (RDI) is equal to the average number of respiratory
disturbances per hour.

Apnea is defined as a cessation of airflow for at least 10 seconds. Hypopnea is defined as an
abnormal respiratory event lasting at least 10 seconds with at least a 30% reduction in
thoracoabdominal movement or airflow as compared to baseline, and with at least a 4% oxygen
desaturation.

The AHI and/or RDI may be measured by polysomnography (PSG) in a facility-based sleep study
laboratory, or by a Type II home sleep test (HST) monitor, a Type III HST monitor, or a Type IV HST
monitor measuring at least 3 channels.

Indications and Limitations of Coverage

B. Nationally Covered Indications

Effective for claims with dates of service on and after March 13, 2008, the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) determines that CPAP therapy when used in adult patients with OSA is
considered reasonable and necessary under the following situations:

The use of CPAP is covered under Medicare when used in adult patients with OSA. Coverage of CPAP is
initially limited to a 12-week period to identify beneficiaries diagnosed with OSA as subsequently
described who benefit from CPAP. CPAP is subsequently covered only for those beneficiaries
diagnosed with OSA who benefit from CPAP during this 12-week period.

The provider of CPAP must conduct education of the beneficiary prior to the use of the CPAP device
to ensure that the beneficiary has been educated in the proper use of the device. A caregiver, for
example a family member, may be compensatory, if consistently available in the beneficiary's home
and willing and able to safely operate the CPAP device.

A positive diagnosis of OSA for the coverage of CPAP must include a clinical evaluation and a
positive:
- attended PSG performed in a sleep laboratory; or
- unattended HST with a Type II home sleep monitoring device; or
- unattended HST with a Type III home sleep monitoring device; or
- unattended HST with a Type IV home sleep monitoring device that measures at least 3 channels.

The sleep test must have been previously ordered by the beneficiary's treating physician and
furnished under appropriate physician supervision.

An initial 12-week period of CPAP is covered in adult patients with OSA if either of the following
criterion using the AHI or RDI are met:
- AHI or RDI greater than or equal to 15 events per hour, or
- AHI or RDI greater than or equal to 5 events and less than or equal to 14 events per hour with
  documented symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, impaired cognition, mood disorders or
  insomnia, or documented hypertension, ischemic heart disease, or history of stroke.

The AHI or RDI is calculated on the average number of events per hour. If the AHI or RDI is
calculated based on less than 2 hours of continuous recorded sleep, the total number of recorded
events to calculate the AHI or RDI during sleep testing must be at a minimum the number of events
that would have been required in a 2-hour period.

C. Nationally Non-covered Indications

Effective for claims with dates of services on and after March 13, 2008, other diagnostic tests for
the diagnosis of OSA, other than those noted above for prescribing CPAP, are not sufficient for the
coverage of CPAP.

D. Other

N/A
